# 1. Introduction To Statistics

## Let's Understand What is Statistics ?&#x20;

Have you ever heard or read statements like these ?&#x20;

> The Average Age of India Population is 28.5 years  , or
>
> Morning walks may reduce heart disease significantly , Study Finds
>
> Out of 10 , 8 Doctors recommends Colgate.&#x20;

The first statement is a **fact** — it tells us a [**measured number**](#user-content-fn-1)[^1]. The other two are **claims based on statistical analysis**. They are not just opinions; they are conclusions drawn from data.&#x20;

## What is statistics ?&#x20;

_<mark style="color:purple;">Statistics can be defined as the collection and interpretation of data.</mark>_&#x20;

All around the world we use statistics to measure and analyze the variability. People have different height, weight, wealth, movie preferences and so on.  These things are all variable, because they keep changing among different individuals.

## Type of Statistics

There are two kinds of Statistics.

1. Inferential Statistics
2. Descriptive Statistics

## 1. Descriptive Statistics

Descriptive Statistics is to get the data and talk about it. In descriptive statistics, you basically summarize the whole data and understand patterns and find meaningful information.&#x20;

for an example

> The average age of india is 28.5 years.

This is an example of descriptive statistics, Where you are only telling what is hidden inside the data.



## Inferential Statistics

Inferential Statistics is to get the data , analyze it and make judgements or claims or predictions.

for an example

> Morning walks may reduce heart disease significantly , Study Finds
>
> Out of 10 , 8 Doctors recommends Colgate.&#x20;
>
> By 2030 , fertile rate may increase by 23 % , Study Finds.&#x20;

In this course , first we will deal with descriptive statistics and then we will deal with inferential statistics.

## Basic Definitions in Statistics

### 1. Population

Population refers to the total amount of **things**. Why do i say things ? Because Population can refer to the total amount of almost anything. Population can refer to the total amount of people, total amount of cars in india, total amount of trees , total amount of patients , almost anything.

### 2. Sample

Sample refers to the small part of the population, that represents the whole population. Sample is used to study the status of population.

### 3. Sample Size

Total amount of things in Sample is called Sample Size.

### 4. Variable

**In Statistics , What we examine is a Variable.**

In Statistics  a variable is any characteristic , number or quantity that can change. It is what you measure or observe or analyze in study.

| Student | Age | Height (cm) | Gender | Marks (%) |
| ------- | --- | ----------- | ------ | --------- |
| A       | 15  | 160         | Male   | 82        |
| B       | 14  | 155         | Female | 90        |
| C       | 15  | 165         | Male   | 78        |

Here age , height , gender and marks are variables. Because their values differ from student to student. It is not constant.

> Variables can be Measurable , Countable and Categorized.

When we talk about people's wealth , hair color , age , height , weight. These are variables that we study in statistics, as they keep changing.&#x20;

In this Data, Student is **identifier.** Age , Height , Gender and Marks are Variables.

## Statistics is all about making sense of these variables.

















[^1]: It means that we have collected age of the population and calculated or measured average. So 28.5 is a measured number.
