# 2. Understanding Variables

Statistics is all about data. If you really want to understand statistics, you must understand Data and Data Types.

## Types of Data

In Statistics , There are two types of Data.

1. Categorical Data Or Qualitative Data
2. Numerical Data Or Quantitative Data

### 1. Categorical Data

Categorical Data is a type of data , that cannot be measured. Categorical data represents **groups or categories** — things that can be **named or labeled**, but **not measured numerically**.

**Eye Color** : Red , Blue , Green , Black

**Gender :** Male , Female

**Grade** : Bad , Good , Excellent

### Types of Categorical Data

1. Ordinal Data
2. Nominal Data

#### 1. Ordinal Data

Ordinal Data is a categorical data that can be put into a logical order. But the difference between categories is not measurable or have unequal gaps. for an example

**Feedback** : Poor < Fun < Very Fun < Amazing

**Education** : High School < Graduate < Post Graduate

> Nominal Data can be put into order but it is not possible to measure the difference between categories.&#x20;
>
> In Feedback it totally depends person to person what is fun or very fun to them.
>
> In Education , There is unequal gaps. Like maybe 3 year difference from high school to graduate and 4 years of difference from Graduate to Post Graduate

#### 2. Nominal Data

Nominal Data has no order , they are just simple labels or categories.

**Eye Color** : Red , Blue , Green , Black

**Gender :** Male , Female











