# 5. Categorical Data and Numerical Data

> Data ! Data ! Data ! . I can't make bricks without clay - Sherlock Holmes

When you will be working on data , You will often come across two kinds of Data:&#x20;

1. Categorical or Qualitative Data
2. Numerical or Quantitative Data

### Categorical Data

Categorical or qualitative data refers to the groups , categories or qualities. Categorical data cannot be measured. for example:

**Eye Color :** Blue , Green , Black , Brown

**T-Shirt Size :** Small , Medium , Large

**Grade :** A , B , C , D

### Numerical Data

Numerical Data refers to the data on which we can perform mathematical operations. for an example:

**Height :** 163.5 , 176.45

**Weight :** 90.5 , 89 , 89.45

**Number of phones you have  :** 1 , 3, 4 , 2&#x20;

> Categorical data is the data divided into groups or categories while numerical data are numbers.

### Types of Categorical Data

There are two types of categorical data.

1. Ordinal Data
2. Nominal Data



### Ordinal Data

Ordinal data is a categorical data where values can be put into logical order. for an example :&#x20;

**T-Shirt Size :** Small < Medium < Large

**Grade :** A  > B > C > D > E

### Nominal Data

Nominal Data is a categorical data with no logical order. for an example:

**Eye Color :** Black , Green , Brown

**City :** Noida , Pune , Maharastra



### Types of Numerical Data

We have two types of Numerical data.&#x20;

1. Discrete Data
2. Continous Data

### Discrete Data

Discrete Data is an Integer Data to put Simply. They cannot have decimal numbers.

**Number of cars you have :** 3 , 1 , 2&#x20;

> You can only have 1 or 2 or 3 cars . You cant have 1.5 number of cars.

### Continuous Data

Continuous Data can have decimal numbers also within a range.

**Height : 76.5 , 78.83  , 45**

**Weight  : 87.5 , 112 , 100.987**

