# 3. Variables in Python

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/Y7oqZo3HG_0" %}

**What are Variables?**

Variables are containers that store temporary values or information in computer memory. To use a variable in a program, you must declare a variable.

**What do we mean by declaring a Variable in Python?**

In Python, the moment we store any information or value in a variable, the variable is declared. We can use variables in a program once we declare them or store a value in them. There are two most important entities to declare a variable:\
a. Variable name\
b. Value

For Example:&#x20;

In \[1]:

```
age = 10
print(age)
```

```
10
```

Here, 10 is a value stored in a variable named age. This is how we declare a Variable in Python.

<h3 align="center"><strong>Naming Convention in Variable:</strong></h3>

There are some rules and best practices to follow while naming a variable:

**Rule 1:**  Variables are Case-Sensitive. It means a variable with lowercase is different than the variable in upper case.

In \[2]:

```
age = 10
Age = 20
AGE = 30
print(age,Age,AGE)
```

```
10 20 30
```

**Rule 2:** We cannot name a variable starting with a digit. `1age = 10` will give an error.

In \[3]:

```
1age = 20
```

```
  File "<ipython-input-3-ef3a9e7a157c>", line 1
    1age = 20
     ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```

**Rule 3:** We cannot use whitespaces or any symbol while naming a variable, though an underscore is allowed (\_). For Example -

* a ge = 10 , @%age=10 will give error
* \_age = 10 , voting\_age = 18 is good.

In \[1]:

```
_company = "Console Flare"
company_name = "ConsoleFlare"
print(_company,company_name)
```

```
Console Flare ConsoleFlare
```

**Best Practice**: While naming a variable, keep in mind to give variables a meaningful name. a = 10 does not give a clearer message than age = 10

**How to assign or store multiple values in multiple variables:**

To assign multiple values in multiple variables, we can simply write them in a single line of code using commas. For Example:

In \[2]:

```
company , company_member = "Console Flare",5000
print(company,company_member)
```

```
Console Flare 5000
```

**How to assign a single Value in multiple variables:**

To assign a single value in multiple variables , we can simply write them in a single line of code using = sign. For Example:

In \[3]:

```
company = firm = startup = "Console flare"
print(company,firm,startup)
```

```
Console flare Console flare Console flare
```

**How to change a value of a variable:**

Suppose there is a variable named age with value 10 , we will write it like this (age = 10) to change the value of variable we will again store another value to the same variable. for Example:

In \[4]:

```
age = 10
print(age)
age = 20
print(age)
```

```
10
20
```

### Assignment:

* Create a variable and store any numerical value.
* Change the value stored in a variable.
* Store 10,20,30 in three different variables in a single line.
* Store 10 in three different variables in a single line.
