# 12. Loops

### Iteration with `while` loops

Another powerful feature of programming languages, closely related to branching, is running one or more statements multiple times. This feature is often referred to as _iteration_ on _looping_, and there are two ways to do this in Python: using `while` loops and `for` loops.

`while` loops have the following syntax:

```
while condition:
    statement(s)
```

Statements in the code block under `while` are executed repeatedly as long as the `condition` evaluates to `True`. Generally, one of the statements under `while` makes some change to a variable that causes the condition to evaluate to `False` after a certain number of iterations.

Let's try to calculate the factorial of `100` using a `while` loop. The factorial of a number `n` is the product (multiplication) of all the numbers from `1` to `n`, i.e., `1*2*3*...*(n-2)*(n-1)*n`.

In \[38]:

```
result = 1
i = 1

while i <= 100:
    result = result * i
    i = i+1

print(f'The factorial of 100 is: {result}')
```

```
The factorial of 100 is: 93326215443944152681699238856266700490715968264381621468592963895217599993229915608941463976156518286253697920827223758251185210916864000000000000000000000000
```

Here's how the above code works:

* We initialize two variables, `result` and, `i`. `result` will contain the final outcome. And `i` is used to keep track of the next number to be multiplied with `result`. Both are initialized to 1 (can you explain why?)
* The condition `i <= 100` holds true (since `i` is initially `1`), so the `while` block is executed.
* The `result` is updated to `result * i`, `i` is increased by `1` and it now has the value `2`.
* At this point, the condition `i <= 100` is evaluated again. Since it continues to hold true, `result` is again updated to `result * i`, and `i` is increased to `3`.
* This process is repeated till the condition becomes false, which happens when `i` holds the value `101`. Once the condition evaluates to `False`, the execution of the loop ends, and the `print` statement below it is executed.

Can you see why `result` contains the value of the factorial of 100 at the end? If not, try adding `print` statements inside the `while` block to print `result` and `i` in each iteration.

> Iteration is a powerful technique because it gives computers a massive advantage over human beings in performing thousands or even millions of repetitive operations really fast. With just 4-5 lines of code, we were able to multiply 100 numbers almost instantly. The same code can be used to multiply a thousand numbers (just change the condition to `i <= 1000`) in a few seconds.

You can check how long a cell takes to execute by adding the _magic_ command `%%time` at the top of a cell. Try checking how long it takes to compute the factorial of `100`, `1000`, `10000`, `100000`, etc.

Here's another example that uses two `while` loops to create an interesting pattern.

#### **Infinite Loops**

Suppose the condition in a `while` loop always holds true. In that case, Python repeatedly executes the code within the loop forever, and the execution of the code never completes. This situation is called an infinite loop. It generally indicates that you've made a mistake in your code. For example, you may have provided the wrong condition or forgotten to update a variable within the loop, eventually falsifying the condition.

If your code is _stuck_ in an infinite loop during execution, just press the "Stop" button on the toolbar (next to "Run") or select "Kernel > Interrupt" from the menu bar. This will _interrupt_ the execution of the code. The following two cells both lead to infinite loops and need to be interrupted.

```
# INFINITE LOOP - INTERRUPT THIS CELL

result = 1
i = 1

while i <= 100:
    result = result * i
    # forgot to increment i
```

```
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
KeyboardInterrupt                         Traceback (most recent call last)
<ipython-input-41-5234d8c241fc> in <module>
      5 
      6 while i <= 100:
----> 7     result = result * i
      8     # forgot to increment i

KeyboardInterrupt: 
```

In \[42]:

```
# INFINITE LOOP - INTERRUPT THIS CELL

result = 1
i = 1

while i > 0 : # wrong condition
    result *= i
    i += 1
```

```
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
KeyboardInterrupt                         Traceback (most recent call last)
<ipython-input-42-c4abf72fce4d> in <module>
      5 
      6 while i > 0 : # wrong condition
----> 7     result *= i
      8     i += 1

KeyboardInterrupt: 
```

**`break` and `continue` statements**

You can use the `break` statement within the loop's body to immediately stop the execution and _break_ out of the loop (even if the condition provided to `while` still holds true).

In \[43]:

```
i = 1
result = 1

while i <= 100:
    result *= i
    if i == 42:
        print('Magic number 42 reached! Stopping execution..')
        break
    i += 1
    
print('i:', i)
print('result:', result)
```

```
Magic number 42 reached! Stopping execution..
i: 42
result: 1405006117752879898543142606244511569936384000000000
```

As you can see above, the value of `i` at the end of execution is 42. This example also shows how you can use an `if` statement within a `while` loop.

Sometimes you may not want to end the loop entirely, but simply skip the remaining statements in the loop and _continue_ to the next loop. You can do this using the `continue` statement.

```
i = 1
result = 1

while i < 20:
    i += 1
    if i % 2 == 0:
        print(f'Skipping {i}')
        continue
    print(f'Multiplying with {i}')
    result = result * i
    
print('i:', i)
print('result:', result)
```

```
Skipping 2
Multiplying with 3
Skipping 4
Multiplying with 5
Skipping 6
Multiplying with 7
Skipping 8
Multiplying with 9
Skipping 10
Multiplying with 11
Skipping 12
Multiplying with 13
Skipping 14
Multiplying with 15
Skipping 16
Multiplying with 17
Skipping 18
Multiplying with 19
Skipping 20
i: 20
result: 654729075
```

In the example above, the statement `result = result * i` inside the loop is skipped when `i` is even, as indicated by the messages printed during execution.

> **Logging**: The process of adding `print` statements at different points in the code (often within loops and conditional statements) for inspecting the values of variables at various stages of execution is called logging. As our programs get larger, they naturally become prone to human errors. Logging can help in verifying the program is working as expected. In many cases, `print` statements are added while writing & testing some code and are removed later.

### Iteration with `for` loops

A `for` loop is used for iterating or looping over sequences, i.e., lists, tuples, dictionaries, strings, and _ranges_. For loops have the following syntax:

```
for value in sequence:
    statement(s)
```

The statements within the loop are executed once for each element in `sequence`. Here's an example that prints all the element of a list.

In \[46]:

```
days = ['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday']

for day in days:
    print(day)
```

```
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
```

Let's try using `for` loops with some other data types.

```
# Looping over a string
for char in 'Monday':
    print(char)
```

```
M
o
n
d
a
y
```

In \[48]:

```
# Looping over a tuple
for fruit in ['Apple', 'Banana', 'Guava']:
    print("Here's a fruit:", fruit)
```

```
Here's a fruit: Apple
Here's a fruit: Banana
Here's a fruit: Guava
```

In \[49]:

```
# Looping over a dictionary
person = {
    'name': 'John Doe',
    'sex': 'Male',
    'age': 32,
    'married': True
}

for key in person:
    print("Key:", key, ",", "Value:", person[key])
```

```
Key: name , Value: John Doe
Key: sex , Value: Male
Key: age , Value: 32
Key: married , Value: True
```

Note that while using a dictionary with a `for` loop, the iteration happens over the dictionary's keys. The key can be used within the loop to access the value. You can also iterate directly over the values using the `.values` method or over key-value pairs using the `.items` method.

In \[50]:

```
for value in person.values():
    print(value)
```

```
John Doe
Male
32
True
```

In \[51]:

```
for key_value_pair in person.items():
    print(key_value_pair)
```

```
('name', 'John Doe')
('sex', 'Male')
('age', 32)
('married', True)
```

Since a key-value pair is a tuple, we can also extract the key & value into separate variables.

```
for key, value in person.items():
    print("Key:", key, ",", "Value:", value)
```

```
Key: name , Value: John Doe
Key: sex , Value: Male
Key: age , Value: 32
Key: married , Value: True
```

**Iterating using `range` and `enumerate`**

The `range` function is used to create a sequence of numbers that can be iterated over using a `for` loop. It can be used in 3 ways:

* `range(n)` - Creates a sequence of numbers from `0` to `n-1`
* `range(a, b)` - Creates a sequence of numbers from `a` to `b-1`
* `range(a, b, step)` - Creates a sequence of numbers from `a` to `b-1` with increments of `step`

Let's try it out.

In \[53]:

```
for i in range(7):
    print(i)
```

```
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
```

In \[54]:

```
for i in range(3, 10):
    print(i)
```

```
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
```

In \[55]:

```
for i in range(3, 14, 4):
    print(i)
```

```
3
7
11
```

**`break`, `continue` and `pass` statements**

Similar to `while` loops, `for` loops also support the `break` and `continue` statements. `break` is used for breaking out of the loop and `continue` is used for skipping ahead to the next iteration.

In \[58]:

```
weekdays = ['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday']
```

In \[59]:

```
for day in weekdays:
    print('Today is {}'.format(day))
    if (day == 'Wednesday'):
        print("I don't work beyond Wednesday!")
        break
```

```
Today is Monday
Today is Tuesday
Today is Wednesday
I don't work beyond Wednesday!
```

In \[60]:

```
for day in weekdays:
    if (day == 'Wednesday'):
        print("I don't work on Wednesday!")
        continue
    print('Today is {}'.format(day))
```

```
Today is Monday
Today is Tuesday
I don't work on Wednesday!
Today is Thursday
Today is Friday
```

Like `if` statements, `for` loops cannot be empty, so you can use a `pass` statement if you don't want to execute any statements inside the loop.

In \[61]:

```
for day in weekdays:
    pass
```

**Nested `for` and `while` loops**

Similar to conditional statements, loops can be nested inside other loops. This is useful for looping lists of lists, dictionaries etc.

In \[62]:

```
persons = [{'name': 'John', 'sex': 'Male'}, {'name': 'Jane', 'sex': 'Female'}]

for person in persons:
    for key in person:
        print(key, ":", person[key])
    print(" ")
```

```
name : John
sex : Male
 
name : Jane
sex : Female
```

```
days = ['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday']
fruits = ['apple', 'banana', 'guava']

for day in days:
    for fruit in fruits:
        print(day, fruit)
```

```
Monday apple
Monday banana
Monday guava
Tuesday apple
Tuesday banana
Tuesday guava
Wednesday apple
Wednesday banana
Wednesday guava
```

With this, we conclude our discussion of branching and loops in Python.

#### Questions for Revision <a href="#questions-for-revision" id="questions-for-revision"></a>

Try answering the following questions to test your understanding of the topics covered in this notebook:\


1. What is iteration or looping in programming languages? Why is it useful?
2. What are the two ways for performing iteration in Python?
3. What is the purpose of the `while` statement in Python?
4. What is the syntax of the `white` statement in Python? Give an example.
5. Write a program to compute the sum of the numbers 1 to 100 using a while loop.
6. Repeat the above program for numbers up to 1000, 10000, and 100000. How long does it take each loop to complete?
7. What is an infinite loop?
8. What causes a program to enter an infinite loop?
9. How do you interrupt an infinite loop within Jupyter?
10. What is the purpose of the `break` statement in Python?
11. Give an example of using a `break` statement within a while loop.
12. What is the purpose of the `continue` statement in Python?
13. Give an example of using the `continue` statement within a while loop.
14. What is logging? How is it useful?
15. What is the purpose of the `for` statement in Python?
16. What is the syntax of `for` loops? Give an example.
17. How are for loops and while loops different?
18. How do you loop over a string? Give an example.
19. How do you loop over a list? Give an example.
20. How do you loop over a tuple? Give an example.
21. How do you loop over a dictionary? Give an example.
22. What is the purpose of the `range` statement? Give an example.
23. What is the purpose of the `enumerate` statement? Give an example.
24. How are the `break`, `continue`, and `pass` statements used in for loops? Give examples.
25. Can loops be nested within other loops? How is nesting useful?
26. Give an example of a for loop nested within another for loop.
27. Give an example of a while loop nested within another while loop.
28. Give an example of a for loop nested within a while loop.
29. Give an example of a while loop nested within a for loop.
